abortion in the year 2019 it's the
debate we didn't want to have in 1919 or
1959 so we're still having it now and
look it up all around the world there
are countries where abortion still
remains in a legal gray area where it's
still an unresolved question I was
raised in Canada I was taught again and
again that somehow Canadians were
morally superior to Americans because
we'd legalized abortions whereas
Americans had not and that is a lie
Canada the United Kingdom's many
countries around the world the debate
rages on precisely because we never have
done what the people of Ireland did we
never made the commitment to
democratically deciding the issue
through a referendum and once you commit
to deciding the issue through a
referendum by the same token you're
gonna commit to through public education
engaging with people caring about their
beliefs their perceptions their
misconceptions and trying to solve the
problem at that level really reaching up
to and engaging with the people who have
the passionate conviction that abortion
is morally equivalent to murder people
who really believe that mothers should
go to prison as criminals if they decide
to have an abortion no I understand that
perspective I understand it because it's
not entirely false it's clinging to
concepts that are true but misleading
and those are important misconceptions
to try to counter in the public and in
this case even though I feel the
left-wing basically has come to the
correct conclusions they've come to the
correct conclusions through reasoning
that is completely false dishonest and
internally incoherent okay so let's
let's let's deal with that first the
argument I've heard just today from The
Young Turks left-wing news source you
will have heard this from left winger as
your whole lives probably the argument
I've heard from the left-wing today is
that abortion is simply a medical
operation between a woman and her
doctor' and that therefore the
government should have no role in it
whatsoever
this is laughably outrageously
ridiculously wrong
and get of course if you look at it as
just a single stage of analysis if you
look at it as an isolated fact there's a
sense in which it's self-evidently true
yes
abortion is a surgical procedure but
that's not what we were debating was it
okay
yes having your tonsils removed is a
surgical procedure yes having breast
implants breast augmentation is a
surgical procedure does that mean that
there's absolutely no role for
government law legislation or public
policy on these things does that mean
that if breast implants were illegal
that you would object on the same
grounds that this is a violation of
women's rights today the young turks
today they claim that this is morally
the same as rape because it's
interfering with what a woman wants to
do with their body they actually made
that claim so you know the fact that
some breast implants are legal and some
are illegal more famously that some
forms of bum enlargement this kind of
surgery are illegal and others are
illegal that's in the news a lot because
some people got those procedures and
some people died you know the fact that
those decisions are made in the public
interest for public welfare by the
government the fact that actually there
are myriad laws even governing whether
or not you can have your tonsils removed
this is this is already one thing that's
incoherent a dishonest Berryman even if
we were to accept the premise that there
was no more ethical significance to an
abortion than there is to having your
tonsils removed we would still have a
question of responsible public education
public policy of trying to reduce the
number of people having their tonsils
removed surgically every year we still
say well look what is it is it a strep
throat epidemic is it lack of Hygiene is
it food standards why is it that so many
people are going to hospitals I mean
they're tossed remove is there is there
a misconception that you'll be a better
singer if you have your tonsils removed
you have to do public education and tell
people stop you know what is it we have
to do step by step so we have a we have
a society where there are as few tonsils
being removed as possible or in fact the
ideal number of tonsillectomies of
tonsil or movie surgeries the ideal
number is actually zero and we're never
going to achieve that but let's admit
this is something
that's bad and wrong and a problem and
that we're engaged in public Paul's
turning us that is the position that is
unthinkable to the left-wing and the
mainstream left the mainstream center
left because they've been avoiding the
real ethical cultural and even legal
problems raised by by abortion by trying
to insist one that it's simply a type of
surgery and then to any legislation
interfering with it is violating woman's
right to just privately decide this with
their doctor and the shame of it is as I
say the left wing has basically come to
the right conclusion that yeah the
simplest solution to this problem is to
legalize abortion and try to have public
education campaigns making birth control
more available indeed even making
adoption more available making
alternatives more available to try to
minimize the number of abortions of
society but on the other hand the
conservatives and the right wing are
clinging to the simple notion that
abortion is a form of infanticide and
that also regarded in isolation is
indeed effect I think every society in
history of the world has had one form of
socially sanctioned legally acceptable
infanticide or another and in our
society here and now when children are
born with very serious mental and
physical disabilities I think we should
have infanticide permitted for some
number of months within some limits for
some conditions even after the birth of
the child it's tremendously scary and
saddening thing to take responsibility
for but again you can confront people
with this moral question well if you
really believe that this is murder if
you really believe that under any
circumstances having an abortion under
any circumstances committing infanticide
is murder who is going to raise those
children is it you and if not you then
who
in the year 2019 the legality of
abortion is a tremendous
simple issue mead complex and convoluted
but the dishonesty of people on both
sides the debate the dishonesty I feel
stems from a fundamental discomfort with
democracy itself very few people on the
left or right are really interested in
democracy democracy in the sense handed
down to us from ancient Athens democracy
in the sense practiced by the people of
Ireland when they had a vote on the
issue when they had a referendum when
they determined through direct democracy
whether abortion should be legal or
illegal that is ultimately the decision
that we all have to make society by
society state by state whatever the case
may be and if we make the decision
democratically then we all have to be
tremendously concerned about public
education with the level of
enlightenment and understanding that the
general public has as is applied to this
issue because the public lacks a certain
level of education or enlightenment on
the issue that it's going to have
terrible consequences for us all that's
one of the fundamental virtues of
democracy as opposed to an elitist
despotism if you live in an elitist
despotism you can just decide well this
is the right answer
a small number of people in power make
that decision and then the rest of us
live with the consequences and it
doesn't matter what percentage to the
general public
fails understand it have an ethical or
other objection to the idea today in the
United States of America only 18 percent
of people take the view that under
absolutely no circumstances should
abortion be legal should abortion be
permitted those people matter
those people matter to if you sincerely
care about democracy but the future of
the democracy in your country you should
care about reaching out to and educating
those people engaging with them and
getting them to think beyond just a
single stage of analysis now the term I
just used may seem unfamiliar but it's
really easy to understand I'm vegan we
have similar and similarly flawed
debates about veganism all the time Matt
Dillahunty recently said that he saw
absolutely nothing wrong morally with
drinking cow's milk and he said this
because
drinking the milk itself doesn't kill a
cow all right that may be true but
that's looking at only a single stage of
the process that's not doing a full
lifecycle analysis not even doing a ten
year analysis okay so if you have a
society where 1 billion people drank 1
billion liters of milk every day why
don't we go through an analysis of what
it takes to produce that milk what it
takes to have cows giving birth to and
maintaining the necessary number of
cattle what those cows eat and the
sewage they're gonna generate and what
happens to that sewage because it
doesn't go into the sewage system it
pollutes the rivers and lakes and oceans
and so on and so forth you look at a
cycle of suffering that's being
perpetuated by forcibly inseminating
cattle keeping them in confinement etc
etc now it's very obvious it's very
obvious and yet someone's a so-called
philosopher a leader of political
opinion like Matt Delonte he spent
decades of his life believing in this
simplified single stage of analysis that
in a sense is true the problem isn't
that it's false the problem is it's true
but misleading all right now I think the
most sincere position adopted by the
right-wing conservatives in this which
is again in isolation true is that they
will say abortion is an act of
infanticide and that is true but that is
only a single stage of analysis I knew
one young man who was what we call a
crack baby his mother used cocaine
during the pregnancy in fact I met him
in Canada it was almost living Canada's
kid his family ran away from the city
they were living the United States was
something like Chicago I forget to try
to get away from the drug scene they
were trying to quit when she found out
she was pregnant she was trying to quit
ran away to a new city escaped the
circle of friends and familiar dealers
you can imagine there's a psychological
as well as practical element to that and
he had brain damage and physical damage
from his mother's drug use and he said
you know he was haunted by this idea
that he was himself born to be a drug
addict you know to some extent that's
scientific in to some extent I think
that's a bit of a folktale so on and so
forth he's got to live with the
consequence of that for the rest of his
life and today these things are a lot
easier to put together partly just due
to the technology of YouTube you can put
together case studies and testimonials
and real examples and you can share them
with the public educator public about
the real consequence of these things in
the past lawyers had to go around and
find people who are willing to testify
in front of Congress or in front of
Parliament depending what country grant
and then newspaper writers would report
on that and then people would just be
looking at the dry text of this and
these people are not seeing the physical
reality of what it is to raise a kid
whose brain damaged or disabled due to
the the drug addiction tomorrow with
that guy I met he was he was one of the
lucky ones and you know he you know he
had use of of all of his arms and legs
and so on he was an interesting guy he
was a nice guy but you can imagine that
was a chilling and very interesting
influence for me in my life meaning
someone who's whose whole life was
shaped by the drug addiction of his of
his parents that's not something that is
maybe won't happen that's something that
is inevitably going to happen the United
States has an epidemic of drug addiction
at the moment I think it's extraordinary
the level of addiction to painkillers to
opiates and there are women who are
going to get pregnant and are going to
continue using opiates continues in
cocaine kids in using heroin continue
drinking alcohol and so on during the
pregnancy and a lot of those women
currently have abortions if you make
abortion illegal because of this single
stage of analysis the isolated principle
that abortion itself is an act of
infanticide let me ask you do you want
to raise those children do you want to
take responsibility for raising the
child of a drug addict
and let's say again not to
hypothetically the drug addict abandons
that child to be a ward of the state to
be left in an orphanage if not you then
who
I have a daughter
my daughter is six years old we gave
birth to the daughter my daughter in a
hospital and I've mentioned this before
the ward we were in basically was the
healthy babies ward but still you're
only there you know if you really have
no problems you leave you leave five
minutes after you give birth so a lot of
people had some mild health problems I
because we were vegan I had to go out
and buy food for my wife and carry it in
and I would come up the stairs in the
next board next next section of the
hospital and those are the families
dealing with really bad news those are
the families who had babies where the
heart was outside the body at the time
of birth born with a hole in their heart
you know hole in their spine babies that
were going through you know surgery and
guess what some of those families some
of them knew the baby had a serious non
formation before it was born some of
them had the option to abort and if you
say but abortion is infanticide I would
say back that's true but that's only a
single stage of analysis and in the
whole history of the world every society
every society I know of has had formally
or informally some capacity for socially
sanctioned for acceptable for legal
infanticide which could indeed include
situations like a child being born with
its heart outside of its chest these
kinds of very serious physical and
mental deformities now I would not
merely vote to make abortion legal so I
do think abortion should be legal that's
what I would vote for I would vote to
make infanticide legal within certain
clearly stated limits I think people can
give birth to a child and
realize wow this child is so physically
impaired or so mentally impaired that
you know and again very often you're
looking at complex surgeries the moment
after the child is born to reconstruct
its head reconstruct its mouth three
conservatives its heart and so on and
yes I do think that responsible adults
parents it's another question who should
make the decision and so on this needs
to be legislated carefully maybe for the
first six months after a child is born
there should be the off option to
euthanize to genuinely commit
infanticide to spare that child a life
with those physical or mental
deformities it's a decision I take very
seriously but taking those decisions
seriously is what democracy is all about
as tempting as it might be for me to
just drop the mic there I think I should
say a little bit more about how morally
incoherent the left wings position on
this is what I hear from the left just
today I was hearing it from the young
turks left-of-centre or podcast a news
show what I hear from the left is the
insistence that the surgical operation
itself is no different from a woman
having her tonsils removed single stage
of analysis and then they build on this
premise the idea that any intervention
by the state whatsoever actually today
the Young Turks
they they said that it was rape they
said it was morally tantamount to rape
for the government to legislate anything
that would constrain what a woman can or
cannot do with her own body
um okay sorry you know there are laws
that govern having your tonsils removed
did you know that I can't just go in and
decide to have my tonsils removed
because I think it would look cool it
would make me sing better they're
actually laws on that um there are laws
very specifically about what women can
and can't do to their bodies some a
breast breast implants breast
augmentation some breast implants are
legal and some are illegal in the United
States most of the surgeries to make
your bum bigger to make your bum or are
illegal and you may have heard about
this some women fly to other countries
where they don't have that legislation
place so yes there are always going to
be laws
governing what surgeries people can and
can't have under what circumstances even
when the surgeries do not have any of
these ethical cultural or religious
questions attached them I don't know of
any religions that attach a special
significance to keeping your tonsils in
your throat I think it's an open
question the morality of breast
augmentation the topic for another video
but yeah that debate isn't over there
are signs now that there were really
serious health consequences negative
health consequences from breast
augmentation and probably that debate
needs to be had again probably needs to
be voted on to what extent which
surgeries are permissible which are not
here's the thing what the left wing is
refusing to do is acknowledge even if we
were just talking about removing your
tonsils because of tonsillitis it would
still be a morally positive virtuous and
pure position to say that you aspire to
have a society in which the fewest
people possible get their tonsils
removed
to say hey you know what the this this
operation it's it's bad it's a bad thing
in a perfect world nobody would have to
have their tonsils removed and we've got
to look at all the policies and
procedures we can put in place so there
are circumstances that avert this
whether as few as possible and so that
there are alternatives all right that
really is the morally responsible
attitude to take towards abortion and
nobody can do it because nobody's going
to get past this single stage of
admitting yes abortion is a form of
infanticide and therefore you know you
know there are all kinds of alternatives
there alternatives include the child
being given up for adoption
there are alternatives that include
making contraception as available as
possible and the public being as
well-informed as possible etc etc
there's a whole series of policy choices
you can make that are gonna minimize the
number of accidental and unwanted
pregnancies and yeah you know some of
them though some of them are coercive um
you know again when you think about it
when you think about women who you know
may be legally insane may be mentally
impaired may be drug addicts
maybe a combination of all three you can
centers get you know one woman like that
is repeatedly getting pregnant
repeatedly
having abortions there are tough
decisions and legal questions they say
okay well at what point do we start
really legislating people have to take
responsibility for their own we
pre-production and when they fail to at
what point you say look we have to
really incentivize people to take this
responsibility and take it seriously
because we don't want to be a society
with X billion abortions happening per
year we want to be a society that a
judicious way through public policy is
minimizing the number of abortions okay
now one of the reasons why I'm so
familiar with all this is that it's
closely comparable to discourse we have
within veganism okay if you come to the
conclusion that everyone should adopt a
vegan diet it's good conclusion but
people come to that conclusion through
incredibly flawed industry circuitous
and long courses of reasoning one who's
come and they say oh well all life is
sacred therefore they're freaking and I
don't believe that it whole I'm a
nihilist I don't like any life is sacred
human or animal but I'm vegan because
it's the right thing to do because I'm
interested in people taking
responsibility for the consequences of
their actions and making the world a
better place
alright legalizing abortion which
countries like Canada have not yet done
countries like the United Kingdom
England have not yet done society is
carrying on a very hypocritical way if
you really believe in democracy you
should press don't press with the status
quo press for outright legalization
right now in the United States of
America
you should be pressing for a referendum
on a constitutional amendment to
legalize abortion should do it
democratically you don't you don't want
Supreme Court justices making decision
stop and think why do you why do you
call a judge in court you know my lord
it's a court think about the meaning of
the word court this is a medieval futile
aristocratic arrangement this is not
democracy you don't want judges deciding
this for you you want to decide this
democratically and as soon as you commit
to a democratic solution this problem
then you're going to commit to public
education lobbying involving people even
the backward people of Arkansas the
people are most committed to making
abortion illegal you're gonna involve
them in this discourse to legalize
abortion um you have to understand that
the commitment to legalizing abortion is
not gonna be the end of the struggle no
more than the commitment legalizing
abortion would end adoption or would end
drug addiction or it and the myriad
other social problems of indeed rape
incest that intersect with this issue
okay you're not going to solve all of
them with one law and you're not gonna
solve all of them with one stroke of the
pen and there's going to be an ongoing
discourse about how we as a society can
better educate and prepare people of
both genders so that we have the fewest
unwanted pregnancy as possible so that
we have the fewest abortions possible I
mean people like to disrespect my truth
but the fact is that you know my name is
I don't know